hi welcome to another episode of coffee
break with pam
today i want to answer one question i'm
asked quite often which is what is
essential skills modern marketers should
possess
after this short live videos
i will give you some ideas in terms of
what are the skills that you need and
you need to give some thoughts in terms
of how you can build that skill set over
a period of time all right
by the way my coffee break is a series
that is syndicated to linkedin facebook
youtube and twitter
if you miss my live stream today you can
always always see my archive of recorded
video on pam dinner youtube channel all
right just go there and check it out if
you have any specific questions you can
always comment and subscribe if you like
the way i explain things please give the
video a thumbs up i really appreciate
that and i love to hear from you
now back to essential skills
these you know type of skill set
probably tend to fall into a different
kind of categories all right number one
a lot of people said oh you need to
develop the career
uh skill set by like soft and hard
soft skills and the hard skills soft
skills include your rec your
communication style excuse me
problem solving ability and relationship
with your management how do you manage
that relationship with your internal
stakeholders and with your senior
management agency partners internal
stakeholders
hard skills are your marketing
disciplines and areas of expertise
another common way to categorize
essential skill is what we call the
horizontal or vertical skills right
horizontal skills are the skill set that
are transferable from one field to
another so this is very similar to a
communication style project management
skill set that you have which is kind of
like a soft skill vertical skills deal
with mastering a specific expertise such
as paid media seo event marketing etc
again kind of like a hard skills type of
a classification
finally you you'll hear people talking
about whether you should be a
a generalist or a specialist
right a generalist is you know a bit of
everything about marketing
while a specialist focuses on specific
expertise
so you know what it doesn't matter the
categories the category really doesn't
matter
honestly when you are thinking about
essential skill sets it's nice to
categorize in a way so you can have a
very solid conversation with your
management but the five key skills i
want to talk about they are not
necessarily defined by any specific
category for digital marketers it's
really based on my experience of making
that transition from a traditional
marketer to a digital marketer as well
as a lot of insights i receive by
coaching many masters
so let me show you in terms of what i
have in mind number one ability to
connect different thoughts
this is a core of digital marketing
by the way what is digital anyway you
know digital means different to
different people to me
digital marketing entails anything and
everything you can seamlessly interact
online
from desktop tablets ipad phones even to
a smartwatch
right digital is that experience
that you interact online doesn't matter
you're a consumed piece of content
passively or you are registered to buy
something everything is digital
so digital does mean different things to
different people for developers it's
probably all about coding and back-end
for marketers it can be content it can
be digital ads email campaigns or even
just website or apps
ultimately
digital also means back-end integration
presents seamless interactions for your
customers on the front end so it's the
back end and the front end that work
together
if digital is done right it creates a
seamless customer experience with
intuitive design that allows people to
discover interact or even buy from you
to me that's what digital is
because it changes from kind of like
from device to device you want to create
a seamless experience from device to
device to do digital live uh excuse me
to do digital right you need
to not only think about how your
customers browse engage with you on
various devices and platforms but also
what you need to deliver
okay your that customer experience
and people or users explain it excuse me
people or users expect
brands to deliver fast and quick easy
services
they also expect
whatever you do you know for them
actually at their fingertips so when you
are thinking about digital you need to
think about in a very holistic manner
that requires you to actually connect
different dots it requires technology to
pull that off to create that experience
and
you also need to understand what your
needs are
okay
for example if you create a piece of
content
you need to think through
how that piece of content will be
presented on your website
and how you will showcase that on social
media platform
or if that piece of content can be
embedded into your app
you need to think about how one piece of
content will be used in multiple
different ways in multiple different
devices along a different customer
journey that's what i mean about
connecting the dots
number two
connecting the dots requires you to be a
generalist
obviously i have a strong opinion about
this right so when somebody asked me hey
you know should i be a specialist or
should i be a journalist my answer is
always that you need to be both but more
importantly is that on the generous
generalist part and i'm speaking that
from my own experience when i was in the
corporate world i was a traditional
marketer
and i did traditional media buy such as
print out of home and radio ads
when i was creating content for print
you know what that's the content for
print and that doesn't have to apply to
a radio ads out of home
well the creative concept may apply but
the copywriting will be completely
different
and each channel at that time acted as a
separate entity they didn't need to be
connected in a way does that make sense
so when people are listening to the
radio they listen to a radio they are
not really thinking about oh how would i
look at this piece of content on the you
know on my uh mobile devices right
so they will separate each marketing
channel if you will
it's no longer the case in the digital
world everything is connected from
social media channels to email outreach
to your app to your website you need to
think about the overall experience you
want to present because they are
interrelated
you can't just focus on one based on
your own growth and responsibility
anymore if you are if you are even
marketing manager you cannot just focus
on event anymore there is a prevent on
the digital element on digital elements
or social media you need to think about
and there there's a post event digital
elements that you need to think through
not just the physical event that you are
responsible for
is that helpful
connecting the dots come from how you're
going to dial up and dial down of each
channel as well as understanding the
overall impact when you dial something
up or down because it will have impact
or have that connecting effect down to
the other channels
so to do that right
you need to know each channel well to
some extent so that's a specialist part
you don't have to be like a master of it
but you need to know enough to be
dangerous
connecting the dots requires you to be a
generalist
okay so that's number two like i said i
have a strong opinion
about this and you may not agree with me
but
once you kind of go through your career
as a marketer you will kind of know what
i mean especially if you want to climb
that covert letter and going up
i also have a strong opinion that each
modern marketer needs to know the basic
concept of
seo
search engine optimization to me that's
a basic foundation of anything digital
if you want google or search engine to
determine
think about it google and the and the
search engine will determine whether you
will be found
all right not you make that decision
it's not media buy well you can buy a
media you can do a pay media and make
sure you're being found but in general
organically if you want your content you
want your name to be found you need to
understand
how seo works
understand that will help you
and your marketing savviness
so it's very important if if machine
that's gonna determine how you you're
gonna be uh found don't you think it's
important you know how that works
like i said i'm not saying that you need
to master seo but you need to understand
the course concept
and the basic idea how it works
i have worked very hard to know seo
because i have my own website and i also
create content if you want to create
content you need to make sure it's a
search optimized it's a lot to learn it
can be overwhelming i get that but that
should not deter you from understanding
how seo works
all right so that's that
and uh honestly working for myself i
create content from blogging to
podcasting to video production even to
live streaming like this
it helps me tremendously to know the ins
and outs of how a different format of
content by doing it
you know i know each field well enough
now i can connect the dots for my
personal brand and the business
at the same time i use that knowledge to
help my clients connect different dots
too
so you can so once you are the general
generalist and you know many different
marketing disciplines you can help your
colleagues and the manager connect the
dots
you go all right you can do this
number three no mod tech stack
understanding technology is super
critical if you want to be a modern
marketer there's no exception whatsoever
many of us are overwhelmed by how fast
technology advanced trust me i know
and we have a hard time sourcing the
right platforms or connecting different
platforms together to build that
automated process
and once you build an automated process
guess what new technology comes along
and you have to redo it i get all that
it's called job security
[Laughter]
it's hard so you wouldn't believe how
much money i spent in trying different
platforms and technology and i and how
hard i work to ensure different
platforms are working together in order
to have a sense of that clarity
you really need to know my tech
right
it's kind of like
you know like a lot of tools i buy i pay
for uh kind of like a subscription model
and to me that the payment is like
paying tuition it's i pay the tuition to
learn it's kind of like going to the
university of the internet you know you
go to this big internet university and
you learn more and more about technology
and by doing that you also get knowledge
in terms of how digital works
all right sometimes you want to learn
you have to pay right there's no
shortcut absolutely none
knowledge is not free
so if you are a content marketer email
marketer or even marketer you tend to
focus on project management and
coordination part of you know trying to
get that email out try to get that event
um you know go live but i strongly
encourage you to understand how
different platforms work together behind
the scenes many of you have like it and
agencies to help you out to pull that
back in but make an effort to understand
you will not regret it
number four understand how to interpret
data and convert it to insight
so i talk about mod tech just now but
the other thing i think is important
equally important if you will is data
analytics i have come to realize that
modern marketers need to conduct at
least some level of
analysis yourself
rather than completely relying on your
data analytics team or data science
science scientist to actually pull the
data for you right you need to be able
to interpret data on your own for
example if you are email marketer you
need to interview open you need to
review excuse me uh open rates and click
through rates as well as monitor the
performance of specific calls to action
such as contacting sales
completing surveys or filling out the
forms
pull the data from other sources not
just your email platform with the basic
analytics is very critical can you
correlate your email and uh platforms
analytics with other platforms
challenge yourself and see if you can do
that
right
learning to evaluate
and the correlated data with different
sources you will start seeing the
effectiveness of your email marketing
effort or you will see why it's not
performing well or you will also see why
your email is not contributing to say
the sales or a lead generation effort
you need to be able to pull the data and
accrually with other sources okay
number five ability to build workflows
and the processes
i've talked about the importance of
understanding digital i talk about the
mod tag and also data analytics the
other thing which is the last essential
skills i want to talk about is ability
to build workflows
in many enterprises building workflows
is marketing ops job
i understand that
okay frankly i think
every modern marketers need to have the
ability to set their workflows and
automation based on their own roles and
responsibilities for example again if
you're doing email marketing and you
send out email
on monthly basis what is your process
can you build a workflow to articulate
that
that's not the marketing ops job that's
your job
but once you start building a workflow
you know
box by box
you will see maybe there are some gaps
maybe there are certain steps
are so incredibly manual you can think
through in terms of what you can do to
automate it
that's
another way to enhance your martech
skill set that's another way to showcase
you can connect different dots
yay
so another example if you are working on
account based marketing can you
challenge yourself to build workflow on
how you are going to implement account
based marketing
right that doesn't mean you have to do
it but once you do that
it actually
help you and create a sense of clarity
and you are able to explain to your team
members or your management what you need
to make that happen
okay
try it you know what i'm talking about
right
soft skills such as how to articulate
your point of view and how to
act well with others make it clear
that that you are a great communicator
that's a given
no matter what kind of job that you are
going to get you need that period
so practice to be a good communicator
and try to
grab every single opportunity you can to
present
to others or even speak at the
conferences that's actually how i learn
right i grab every single opportunity i
can to present to management
whenever you know my manager was like
hey we have we have to showcase our
annual plan is anybody interested
presented to say nancy and i always say
yeah i can do it i know my you know
initially i sucked
a big time
and i stuttered but you know what over a
period of time when you practice enough
you get better it's kind of like i
challenge myself to do this live
streaming
trust me i don't think i'm that good but
i make an effort right i do some
preparation upfront and i also practice
with my video producer scott who is
actually watching this one and trying to
monitor my performance and also make
sure that all the the technical part of
it uh going goes well
so i try to put myself out there
and uh you should do something similar
if you want to practice your
communication and presentation skills
put yourself out there there's no other
way to grow
over time you'll get better trust me on
this
all right so
these five essential skills is actually
not by any conventional
approach or recommendation like you read
other blogs or books it's based on my
own experience being a digital marketer
and coaching many many marketers out
there
and i personally think these five things
is what i have seen
and you need in order to uh be a solid
b2b marketers in the next 10 15 years so
let's review all of them one more time
number one
learn how to connect different dots okay
like i said when you are creating a
piece of something think through how
this will be used that's a perfect
example of connecting different dots
number two
be a journalist by knowing different
marketing disciplines don't just focus
on your roles and your responsibilities
try to understand how other marketings
are done
and then trying to connect the dots back
to what you do
right
number three make ma tag your bff
understand marketing technologies as
much as you can right
ask questions if your agency and it
people are doing that go have one-on-one
with them buy them a coffee do whatever
try to understand the platforms that
they are sourcing for you and understand
how the back end works together
number four use data to help you make
decisions data driven
decision making is a critical moving
forward because everything is digital
when you have things that's trackable
digitally you should be able to see the
data when you have data you should be
able to analyze it once you analyze it
you will have a certain point of view
so use data to help you make decision
number five
be able to build workflows to better
articulate the implementation process if
nobody is doing it
do it just take on it and and build it
and see how much you understand the
whole process
okay
so building workflow is super critical
to understand digital marketing
especially the front end and the backend
now i would like you to think about what
you can do to grow these skill sets
if you have any questions on what to
focus on first reach out to me let's
have a chat
more than happy to help out help help
out excuse me and just
share some of the the recommendation i
have
for other people that i have coached
i also love to hear in the comments if
you have any skill set that you are
working on that you think is super
important to be a modern marketer
and if i didn't mention any skill set
that you think very imperative essential
you know what join the conversation let
me know i love to hear from you
all right i hope you enjoyed today's
coffee break yay
don't forget to comment and subscribe
below and join me next time for a brand
new topic take care bye